---
title: "Using Convolutional Neural Networks to Examine Structural Abnormalities in Schizophrenia"
date: "2017-03-20"
excerpt: Schizophrenia Bulletin
tags:
  - Deep learning
  - Convolutional neural networks
header:
  teaser: assets/images/publications/scibull.png
---

*__Authors__: Sandra Vieira, Walter HL Pinaya, Andrea Mechelli*

**Journal: Schizophrenia Bulletin**

DOI: [10.1093/schbul/sbx024.078](https://doi.org/10.1093/schbul/sbx024.078)  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2018.02.221

**Abstract**:  Deep learning (DL) is a family of  machine learning methods  that  has  gained  considerable  attention  in  the scientific  community, breaking benchmark records in areas such as speech and visual recognition.  DL  differs  from  conventional machine  learning  methods  by  virtue  of   its  ability  to  learn  the  optimal  representation  from  the  raw  data through  consecutive  nonlinear  transformations,  achieving  increasingly higher levels of  abstraction and complexity. Initial applications of  deep learning  in  neuroimaging  studies  of   psychiatric  populations,  including schizophrenia, have yielded promising results. Convolutional neural networks  (ConvNets)  is  a  particularly  promising  deep  leaning  model  that has  yet  to  be  tested  in  schizophrenia.  The  aim  of   this  study  was  to  (1) investigate how consistent is the performance of  ConvNets when applied to  structural  MRI  data  to  identify  individuals  diagnosed  with  schizophrenia  from  healthy  controls  and  (2)  examine  what  brain  regions  best contributed to distinguish the 2 groups. **Methods**: Four independent data sets (Site 1: SZ = 58, HC = 58; Site 2: SZ = 136, HC = 139; Site 3: SZ = 72, HC = 70; Site 4: SZ = 44, HC = 44) with  T1-weighted  MRI  images  taken  from  individuals  diagnosed  with schizophrenia  and  healthy  controls  were  used.  The  performance  of   the ConvNets  models  was  assessed  using  a  20-fold  cross-validation  scheme, with 100 iterations within each fold. In each fold, 80% of  the images were used  for  training,  10%  for  the  test  set,  and  another  10%  validation  set.  A drop-out layer as well as L2 and L1 regularizers were used to help preventing overfitting. **Results**: The best solutions yielded accuracies of  71%, 69%, 65%, and 64% for the 4 data sets. After merging all datasets, the best performance for the total  sample  (SZ  =  310,  HC  =  311)  was  70%.  The  regions  that  provided the  greatest  contribution  to  classification  were  the  temporal  cortex  (left superior temporal lobe, left middle temporal lobe, and left fusiform gyrus), the limbic-paralimbic  cortex  (hippocampus,  parahippocampal  gyrus,  left insula), subcortical structures (putamen, caudate, and right thalamus), and the cerebellum. **Conclusion**: In  conclusion,  ConvNets  showed  a  moderate  yet  consistent performance  across  the  4  data  sets  as  well  as  for  the  combined  data  set, suggesting good replicability. The most informative regions for the classification are consistent with the existing literature on structural abnormalities in schizophrenia. Taken together these results suggest that ConvNets could become a potentially useful and reliable approach in the search for neuroanatomical biomarkers of  schizophrenia.
{: .notice}
